<a name="tinned"></a>
## Tinned/Canned/Jarred Foods

No tinned, canned or jarred foods can be eaten on this diet because they all contain potentially high levels of biogenic amines. Canned fish and meat products are particularly bad, but even canned vegetables should be avoided as they still contain some proteins and so still might contain biogenic amines.

Canning/jarring of foods typically involves cooking the food in an airtight environment so that the microbes that cause food to spoil and which can cause food poisoning are killed off. Often you read that all microbes are killed off, but [this isn't the case[(https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/food-science/canning)]. I think maybe people write this as a simplification or to mean that all microbes that are known to cause trouble are killed off. The microbes that survive are anaerobic and over time convert some of the amino acids in the protein of the food into amines. Because these amines are created by life forms (the microbes) they are called biogenic amines. 

Studies on the biogenic amine content of canned foods have been carried out often by scientists and have shown consistently that they contain much higher levels than in fresh food. Try googling 'biogenic amine content of canned foods' and you'll get lots of results of tests going back decades. The reason it's been studied so many times is that even mainstream science views dietary biogenic amines as harmful, but only at very high concentrations such that people show immediate signs of illness. So there are laws in most countries that concentrations above a certain, very high, amount of biogenic amines in foods aren't allowed. In effect, the mainstream assumption is that very large concentrations of biogenic amines do pass from the digestive system into the blood stream but smaller amounts, that are still very large compared to the amounts we evolved eating, don't pass at all but are fully neutralised in the digestive system. My theory is that these smaller amounts do still pass into the blood stream. I think the problem is that scientists and doctors tend to notice things that make people very unwell very quickly but sometimes ignore things that take years or even decades to have an effect.

For example, I did the above google search and found the article [Determination of biogenic amines in fish products](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282351179_Determination_of_biogenic_amines_in_fish_products). It found that tinned sardine fillets have on average 51 mg/kg of histamine. The legal limit tends to be [100 mg/kg](https://www.fsai.ie/faq/histamine_fish.html), so these have half the legal limit. Let me just repeat what I said above, because really I find it astounding. The mainstream theory is that if you eat a food containing 50 mg/kg of histamine your body will fully neutralise the histamine and none will pass into your bloodstream, whereas if you eat a food containing 100 mg/kg of histamine the histamine will pass into your bloodstream and make you very ill. This binary all-or-nothing approach really seems wrong to me and quite out of line with the more analogue way that the body tends to work.

Freshly caught/slaughtered/harvested foods contains virtually no histamine or other biogenic amines at all. 

My theory isn't that the body is completely unable to neutralise biogenic amines under any circumstances but rather that it can only at best neutralise relatively small amounts of biogenic amines that are in foods that we have evolved eating in a form that contain some biogenic amines. So I think it likely that if, for example, you buy fish that has been caught one day ago and stored at just above freezing point, it may have somewhat higher levels of biogenic amines than a fish that has just been caught. But it will also have somewhat higher levels of other products of ageing such as those caused by aerobic microbes. I think that we haven't evolved necessarily eating fish that was cooked and eaten immediately after being caught, but we did always eat fish that was very fresh and in which the aerobic microbes - whose effects we can detect - would have had the same opportunities as the anaerobic microbes. I think it possible that in this circumstance our bodies can recognise that food has some degree of biogenic amines, based on recognising the by-products of the aerobic microbes, and so knows to neutralise them. But with tinned foods, there are no by-products of aerobic microbes, just the by-products of anaerobic microbes, so the body doesn't realise that biogenic amines need to be neutralised.

In any case, whether the above aspect of my theory is right or not, the fact is that we ate fresh foods such as fish bought from a fishmonger that had been caught up to a day or so previously and we didn't have the same problems of chronic illness that have mushroomed over the past few decades. So according to my theory, the very low levels of biogenic amines in these fresh foods are safe. But tinned foods are not.
