<a name="sun"></a>
## Sun exposure 

This is still somewhat controversial and contrary to mainstream health advice. It's not my theory - it's what other scientists have advised. Many highly educated and intelligent scientists support the mainstream advice (which is to avoid unprotected exposure to the sun at all times and at all costs - the 'slip, slop and slap' brigade). Other highly educated and intelligent scientists say that small amounts of exposure to the sun without sunblock is not only safe but actually critical for good health. I have listened to both sides of the argument and have concluded that these latter scientists make more sense. So I follow the rules, set out below, but it's possible that the diet would work without them, I don't know. If you're unhappy about getting some exposure to the sun, then don't do it - it's up to you.

The scientists who advocate small amounts of exposure to the sun argue that we have evolved getting exposure to the sun and we need it for good health. It is known that exposure to the sun enables the body to produce vitamin D. I read that there are about 80 diseases that are statistically associated with low vitamin D levels, including obesity (I can't find the source, sorry). However, taking vitamin D supplements only helps about 20 of them. It is therefore likely that at least some of the other 60 are caused by a lack of some other benefit of sunlight other than the creation of vitamin D. Some other pathways for health benefits of sunlight have been suggested that lead to [immune system benefits](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2290997/#__sec8title) and a reduction in [coronary heart disease](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8935479/). 

Many scientists also argue that even skin cancer risk is reduced by having small amounts of exposure to the sun. They believe that people who go on sunny holidays and develop a tan gradually without getting sunburnt are less likely to get skin cancer because the darker skin is protective. It's the people who diligently follow the 'slip, slop and slap' protocol who always remain as white as a sheet and then accidentally get caught in the sun and have no natural protection that are at a higher risk of getting skin cancer. 

There is also an argument that sunblock itself actually increases the chance of getting skin cancer. The theory is that sunblock doesn't magically cause the UV rays to disappear (energy can't be created or destroyed) - it just converts them to radiation of different wavelengths that don't cause sunburn. But these wavelengths are unnatural - we didn't evolve having to deal with radiation of these wavelengths. (The same is true of the wavelengths of the radiation from sunbeds, which are known to increase the risk of skin cancer.) Some scientists argue that the massive increases in rates of skin cancer over the last few decades actually follows, and is at least partly caused by, the increases in the use of sunblock. Previously, a tiny proportion of people got skin cancer, then the authorities recommended the use of sunblock, then people started using sunblock regularly, then skin cancer became widespread. As rates of skin cancer increased, the recommendations to use sunblock increased and so the use of sunblock increased and so the rates of skin cancer increased further. A vicious cycle.

So the rule I follow about sunblock is that I only wear it if the only alternative is sunburn. Sunburn is definitely very bad for you and sunblock definitely protects against it. But I generally avoid any situation where I might get sunburned - I just stay in the shade. So in a typical year, I won't wear sunblock at any point but I will never get sunburned because the only exposure I have to the sun will be under the very controlled conditions as described further below. This is quite easy living in England where we are blessed, if that's the right word, with plenty of cloud cover year-round. I suppose it would be harder in a sunnier country.

The actual amount of exposure to the sun without sunblock (or moisturising cream which has a similar effect) that is needed for good health isn't well established. Some people say that if you are light-skinned just regularly walking around in a t-shirt will be enough. A study I once read (and can't now find) suggested that there may be little benefit beyond about 10 half-body sunbathing sessions a year of about 20 minutes each. I aim to get more than this though. 

People who are non-white often think that they don't need exposure to the sun, and often want to avoid darker skin for aesthetic reasons. However, my view is that non-white people actually need more exposure to the sun than white people, because it takes more sunshine to get the same health benefits.

This is what I do:
1. On a sunny day with a clear blue sky (it does happen in England sometimes), I go sunbathing.
1. I check the strength of the UV radiation using a little meter I bought on Amazon. You tell it your skin type and it tells you how long you can safely spend in the sun. For me in England, the UV strength on a sunny day is typically 5 and it says I can stay out safely for about 50 minutes. But I will do much less than that even, especially at the start of the year when I am very white - I'll only do about 30 minutes. Towards the end of the summer, when I've developed a bit of a tan, I might go to about 45 minutes.
1. I split the time into 4 sessions, 2 on my front, 2 on my back and each facing 2 different directions. I generally lie perpendicularly to the sun although I don't think it really matters.  
1. I don't wear any sunblock or moisturising cream.
1. I sunbathe full body apart from my trunks (I'm usually in a public place like a park).
1. I try to sunbathe between 11 am and 2 pm when the ratio of UVB to UVA is highest.
1. I aim to sunbathe for a short enough time that I don't notice any difference whatsoever - certainly no sunburn, but not even any tightness of my skin by the end of the day or any noticeable change in my skin colour. Over the summer, I will become a bit less white, but it will happen so gradually that I will hardly notice. The objective is not to get a tan but to just get some safe exposure to the sun for the health benefits.
1. I hope to do this around 10 to 15 times a year. It depends on the weather. England doesn't provide that many days with a dependable clear blue sky for most of the day. Rarely more than 20 a year. We have lots of days in the summer with sunny spells but it's harder to sunbathe on those days because the sun keeps going in.
1. I do enjoy walking and will often walk about in a t-shirt and shorts on a sunny day. But I'm careful to not get too much exposure to the sun. I'll try to walk in the shade or walk early in the morning or later in the afternoon when the sun isn't very strong.

I never take vitamin D pills. Firstly, I have no need for them because I believe that I get enough natural exposure to the sun. But also, by not taking vitamin D pills you can then use your vitamin D level (measured in blood tests) as a guide to whether you are getting enough sun. Although there isn't any research to prove this as far as I know, my assumption is that if you are getting enough exposure to the sun to have a good vitamin D level, then you are also probably getting enough exposure to the sun for the other pathways through which the sun brings health benefits.

I also never go on a sunbed. It's well established as far as I know that these are extremely bad for your health. You need the real thing.
