<a name="fermented"></a>
## Fermented foods

I don't really know whether fermented foods are good or bad, but people with histamine intolerance consistently report that they tend to react badly to them, and I sometimes do, so in the absence of any more conclusive evidence, they are not recommended on this diet except in small quantities, or on an occasional basis such as once a week, or as part of a short-term regime to rebuild a damaged gut. Overall, I think it's probably best to avoid them but I do eat them from time to time as I really like some of them.

Fermented foods such as sauerkraut, yogurt, kombucha, kefir, kimchi and pickles are considered healthy by many, but they are very high in biogenic amines. Cheese, chocolate, alcoholic drinks, bread, olives and some mustards are also fermented and may or may not be healthy but tend to be high in biogenic amines.

The health benefit that fermented foods are often credited with is that they contribute to healthy gut microbes, but this is controversial. 

Firstly, no one is sure what exactly constitutes healthy gut microbes. A more diverse set of gut microbes is considered to be probably better. A set of gut microbes that is more similar to that of a hunter-gatherer rather than a normal Westerner is considered to be probably better. But the actions and interactions of gut microbes are still so poorly understood that it's very hard to take the results of a gut microbe analysis and say whether it is good or bad. Therefore it is hard to be sure that a set of gut microbes of a person who eats fermented foods regularly is better than that of a person who doesn't.

Secondly, it isn't clear that hunter-gatherers ate fermented foods. No one really knows. They probably didn't though. They probably lacked the equipment to ferment foods themselves.

Thirdly, eating fermented foods, or taking probiotics for that matter, doesn't lead to a permanent change in gut microbes, but at most a short-lived change of probably not more than 2 weeks. So you have to keep eating them to maintain the difference. This means that you have to keep eating foods high in biogenic amines for a benefit that may be an illusion in the first place.

On the other hand, the Japanese, as far as I know, do eat small quantities of fermented foods regularly and probably have the best health of any developed nation. Those little sachets of pickled ginger you get with your sushi are possibly an example of the sort of volume of fermented food they might be eating. I think that the Japanese tend to eat very fresh food as well, so this or something else could account for their good health. But in any case, it doesn't seem to be doing them any harm. Westerners have eaten bread and drunk beer and wine for thousands of years and yet health problems such as obesity and other 'diseases of industrialisation' have only really exploded in the last few decades. Note that the bread they ate would have been sourdough bread as commercial yeast wouldn't have been available. And many traditional peoples who had very good health ate some fermented foods. Also, a surprisingly large proportion of centenarians report drinking a small amount of whisky on a daily basis so there may be some health benefits to it (I hope so, I love whisky).

It's possible that our bodies can neutralise small quantities of biogenic amines and that it's just the huge volumes that we are eating nowadays that overwhelm us. This might explain why eating very small quantities of fermented foods is ok. Also, it's possible that fermented foods and drinks that we've been consuming for thousands of years can be neutralised by our bodies so long as they are in a form that our bodies recognise. So traditionally made sourdough bread might be a lot better than modern bread.

Also, the problems caused by inflammation tend to be due to the inflammation being chronic - in other words, from the body being in a constant state of inflammation over a long period. We have evolved to have short periods of inflammation such as when we have an infection. It is where you have inflammation most of the time for decades that the problems really become serious I think. So if you consume fermented foods occasionally, for example once per week, then you will hopefully not be in a state of inflammation most of the time, and so you might be ok. I don't know.

Personally, I do eat some fermented foods because I really like them. I try to eat sourdough bread, traditionally-made mustard in very small quantities and spirits rather than wine or beer as they're lower in biogenic amines. Younger cheeses, such as mild brie, tend to be lower in biogenic amines so I usually choose those over a more mature cheese.
