## Broken Mechanisms

In my opinion, most or all of the 'diseases of industrialisation' can be viewed as failures of mechanisms in our bodies rather than mainly the result of an external cause. This is more a way of looking at things rather than a new theory in itself.  

The mainstream approach seems to be to treat all diseases as the result of an external cause, perhaps because, before the diseases of industrialisation, this was probably almost always the case. For example, if a person is bitten by a mosquito that passes on the parasite that causes malaria, then that parasite is the external cause of the malaria. Whether the person survives will depend on whether their immune systems can defeat the parasite.

However, I don't think that the diseases of industrialisation fit well into this paradigm. Our species, homo sapiens, has been around for about 200,000 to 300,000 years and it's probably only been in the last few hundred that these diseases have existed in anything other than negligible amounts and only in the last 40 or so years that they have really mushroomed.

The external environment has changed, but it doesn't seem to me to have changed enough to explain the rise of these diseases. The explanation that seems better to me is that mechanisms in our bodies that used to stop these diseases from ever happening have stopped working. We have broken our natural mechanisms.

For example, I believe that we have a natural mechanism to stop us from becoming fat. The argument that some put forward that we have evolved to put on as much weight as possible when there's enough food so as to survive in a famine does not, in my opinion, stand up at all to scrutiny. The argument is called 'the thrifty gene hypothesis' and has been very widely discredited. Instead, many experts say that we evolved in an environment with few humans and plenty of resources that our ancestors were very adept at using. Scientists studying hunter gathers reckon that it probably only took them 2 or 3 days of work a week to get all the food they needed and famines would have been rare. The Economist magazine says that famines only happen when both a natural disaster and bad government occur together. I doubt that any hunter gatherer chiefs, however bad, would have been able to contribute to a famine - they just wouldn't have had enough influence over the environment. The idea that humans have only had enough food to eat in the last 40 years, and that's why many have become so fat, doesn't even tie up with living memory. I remember 40 years ago, when almost no-one was that fat, and there was a huge middle class in Britain that had enough food to eat and didn't get fat.

Whereas not being fat would have been advantageous to our ancestors as it would have helped with hunting, gathering, running from wild animals and fending off rival humans. So I think it likely that we evolved to have a natural mechanism to stop us getting fat. 

So it seems more likely to me that where people have not stayed slim, it's because they have broken this mechanism. The answer is not to try to starve themselves when they feel ravenous and force themselves to exercise when they feel completely lethargic, because it takes more will power than people have over the long term. The answer is to fix the mechanism so that the body will naturally become slimmer by being less hungry and feeling more energetic. The person will be working with their body rather than against it.

It is my theory that a significant contributing factor to breaking this mechanism is chronic inflammation caused by dietary biogenic amines passing into the blood stream. I have noticed that when I have a cold I always feel hungrier and more lethargic than normal and I invariably put on weight. But then I lose that weight again very easily on recovering from the cold. It makes sense to me that when the body is under attack from a parasite it should go into a state of inflammation and take on more calories to give its immune system the best chance of defeating the parasite. So it seems likely to me that when the body is in a state of inflammation, it will naturally want to take on more calories. The problem with today's diet of foods containing biogenic amines, according to my theory, is that people have a state of permanent inflammation and so they permanently put on weight. By changing to a diet low in biogenic amines they might be able to end their chronic inflammation and their bodies might naturally lose weight as they will feel less hungry and more energetic for a time until their weight has reduced again. For a person of a healthy weight, eating extra calories will not lead to weight gain but rather to not feeling hungry for longer or feeling more energetic.  

Another example is that of heart disease. The mainstream efforts to address this problem seem to involve looking for external causes. The idea seems to be that something external is causing problematic plaque deposits to form in the heart and arteries. Saturated fat has been suggested as a factor. However, many doctors and scientists who have studied this put up very compelling arguments as to why saturated fat is not a cause of heart disease. But what no one seems to be considering is the notion that plaques forming in the heart and arteries is completely normal and has always happened, but throughout most of human existence the body simply removed them again. What has changed might instead be that we have broken the mechanism that removes the plaques so that they keep accumulating and end up causing heart disease and strokes.

Here's my layman's view of inflammation and removal of debris within the body. Imagine you are bitten by a mosquito. It doesn't carry the parasite that causes malaria so you're not in any serious danger. Soon after the bite, the site of the bite swells up and becomes itchy. This is a reaction of the body to try to fight a possible infection that might arise because of the bite. The inflammation of the area helps to stop the spread of any parasites that might have been introduced. It's intentionally created by the body and the body achieves this by the release of histamine, a biogenic amine, at the local site. It may be annoying, but it's a good thing. Over the next few days, the body's immune system will go to work to make the area safe, killing any parasites it can. Once the site is safe, the swelling comes down and then, over the next few days, the site is restored to normal and looks exactly the same as before the bite happened. It seems likely to me that this final step would involve removing any debris from the site such as the immune cells that were active there. It wouldn't make sense to reduce the inflammation until the site is safe and it wouldn't make sense to remove the debris until the site is safe, so it seems plausible to me that the body would naturally not remove debris from an internal site until any inflammation has subsided.

My theory is that dietary biogenic amines pass into the blood stream and can attach to receptor cells in the heart and arteries and cause inflammation. Because this happens after most meals, the inflammation is chronic - it's there almost all the time for decades. So perhaps, because of the chronic inflammation, the body's natural mechanism for clearing any plaques from the heart and arteries holds off doing so, waiting for the inflammation to subside. But it never does.
