<a name="compulsive"></a>
## Compulsive Foods

There is a theory that is becoming increasingly accepted amongst obesity researchers that a significant contributing factor to the rise in levels of obesity is that foods have become more compulsive. That is, we feel a desire to eat them beyond what is necessary to provide enough calories to live. I think this theory is almost certainly right and so it forms part of the diet.

The idea is that as we have moved away from eating foods that were prepared in our own kitchens and instead have started to eat mostly foods that have been prepared commercially, such as ready meals, fast food and confectionery, the provision of these foods has become a competitive business. To succeed in a competitive environment, food producers have had to design their products to make them as desirable as possible. Intentionally or unintentionally, they have created foods that are, in effect, addictive. We feel compelled to eat them even when we aren't hungry. Imagine you are walking along the road and you aren't that hungry. Someone suggests to you that you might like to eat a salad. You say, "Well, actually I'm not that hungry." But if someone suggests to you that you might like some pizza, you suddenly feel a desire to eat it. 

So we've ended up eating when we aren't hungry and so we've overridden the mechanism that would otherwise stop us eating when we had no need for the additional calories. So we've become fat.

I think that this theory alone could explain the rise in obesity without needing my theory about biogenic amines at all. The main aspect where I think my theory is better is that the compulsive foods theory doesn't provide a clear mechanism for creating chronic inflammation and doesn't explain all the other chronic illnesses that have become widespread over the last few decades. Whereas mine does. But I think that both are important factors. 

Some proponents of this theory of compulsive foods talk of 'highly palatable foods' as the problem, and have sometimes adopted a policy of only eating bland and unappetising foods in order to stay slim. They equate foods that taste really nice with foods that are compulsive. I don't agree with this at all and it is absolutely not a requirement of this diet to eat bland foods.

I have the good fortune of having a father who is a brilliant cook. He was a restaurateur, running a restaurant that produced mainly French provincial-style cuisine (but in England). I grew up eating amazing food. I ate at the restaurant whenever I wanted to. Being the bosses son, I just showed up and asked for whatever I wanted and my father or one of the lovely chefs there would produce it. At home, my father did the cooking and his food was always delicious. For our holidays we would go on tours of France, armed with a copy of the Michelin guide, and we would visit some of the best restaurants in France. In my opinion, the French food I grew up eating tastes far nicer than any fast food hamburger, fried chicken or pizza. I wouldn't go as far as to say it tasted better than chocolate. But the interesting thing was that I never had a craving for my father's food, or any other French food, when I wasn't hungry. If my father offered me some food and I wasn't hungry, I would just say that I wasn't hungry. But I got the same cravings for junk food as anyone else. Despite the availability of amazing French food, I'm ashamed to say that I regularly ate junk food.

So food compulsion is not about taste in my opinion. It's about craving. My father's food tasted far better but I never craved it.

This diet bans the eating of foods that are compulsive, apart from perhaps very occasionally. But the test of whether a food is compulsive or not isn't based on how good it tastes. It is based on whether you have a desire for that food when you are not hungry. If you are walking down the road and you see a pizza shop and you feel an urge for some pizza, ask yourself whether you would also eat a salad or some other home-cooked food. If you find foods that you fancy eating when you aren't in the mood for eating healthy foods then you should conclude that that food is compulsive. Having concluded this, I think that it is better to, generally, never eat those foods, even when you are genuinely hungry. It is better to get over the addiction. A food should not be compulsive. Proper food, in my opinion, is desirable when you are hungry and not when you are not.

