## Histamine Intolerance

Let me start with an overview of histamine intolerance - a condition I personally suffer from - because it sets out what is accepted by the mainstream scientists and doctors.

Histamine intolerance is an officially-recognised condition that is based on the following 3 accepted facts.

1. Many modern foods, unlike those eaten by our ancestors, contain relatively large quantities of histamine and other so-called 'biogenic amines' - molecules that are used internally as a signalling chemical for various purposes by many species including humans. The majority of methods that allow foods to have a longer shelf life and be available out of season cause biogenic amines to be created in the foods. The biogenic amines are created as a by-product of microbial activity and increase over time; when the food is first harvested/killed it contains negligible quantities of biogenic amines.
1. If the histamine and other biogenic amines were to pass from the foods in our digestive systems into the blood stream, it would be expected to cause health issues because various parts of the body would respond to their signalling effects but the signalling would be unwanted because it had come from foods and not from the body's own signalling mechanisms. Biogenic amines are known to be involved in stimulating inflammation, pulling calcium out of bones, regulating the sleep-wake cycle, mediating neuronal signalling and regulating digestion. 
1. The digestive system neutralizes the biogenic amines with a chemical called DAO so that they do not pass into the blood stream and do not cause these signalling problems. But in 1% of people, this neutralization process is inadequate and biogenic amines do pass into the bloodstream and do cause signalling problems and corresponding health problems. This 1% of people are said to have histamine intolerance.

It is this final part that is wrong according to my theory. It is instead between 60% and 100% of people that cannot neutralize all of the biogenic amines in food and this leads to a large variety of potential health problems including chronic inflammation, calcium metabolism disorders, digestive disorders and sleep disorders. Chronic inflammation then contributes strongly to one or more of: weight gain, heart disease, cancer, auto-immune diseases and cognitive diseases.

I don't know why exactly biogenic amines don't get fully neutralized in the digestive system. I don't dispute that the body has a mechanism, via DAO, to neutralize them. I think it is likely that it is due to one or more of the following reasons:

1. The sheer volume of biogenic amines we consume nowadays is too much for the body's neutralization system to cope with and it gets overwhelmed.
1. The neutralization of biogenic amines with DAO only happens where the food is one which we have been eating as a species for a long time in a form that contains biogenic amines so that the body recognises the food and knows to neutralize the biogenic amines. Modern methods of food production have resulted in a large number of foods containing biogenic amines that would never have contained them before, particularly during our evolution as a species, and so our bodies do not expect them to have biogenic amines and do not neutralize them.
1. We have damaged our body's mechanism for neutralising biogenic amines, for example by taking certain medications that suppress the production of DAO or by damaging our gut microbiome.
