## Hunger and fatigue

In my experience, there are broadly 2 types of hunger. There is normal hunger which comes on if it's been a while since you last ate and gets worse gradually until you eat again. Then there is an extreme type of hunger that I only get when I'm ill - for example when I have a cold. This hunger is overwhelming and compelling. Regardless of how much self control you have, there is no resisting it. Your body needs more energy to fight the infection and doesn't give you a choice. You absolutely have to eat. You can think of nothing else but your hunger. 

When I have a cold I invariably eat more and gain a few pounds, but then once I'm over the cold I feel far less hungry and easily return to my previous weight. 

I also feel totally exhausted when I have a cold as my body is telling me that it needs all its energy to fight the infection. The fatigue, like the hunger, is totally overwhelming and compels me to rest.

I don't know what it's like being someone else, but my suspicion is that for overweight people, the type of hunger they get is the second type, the overwhelming and compelling type. According to my theory, what happens is that the biogenic amines in the food they eat get into their blood stream and cause inflammation. The inflammation then causes their bodies to incorrectly assume that they have an infection to fight and so the second type of hunger is triggered, as well as the fatigue. They have no choice but to eat and rest, regardless of how much self control they have. But because they eat food that is high in biogenic amines every day, the inflammation never subsides and the extreme hunger and fatigue never go. They can see that they are eating a lot and exercising little and can also see that they are eating a lot more and exercising much less than thin people, and they assume that they have far less self control than thin people and blame themselves. Other people, both overweight and thin, think the same way and blame overweight people for lacking self control and consider their weight problem to be their own fault due to their gluttony and sloth.

But I don't think that overweight people do lack self control, but rather, the intensity of the hunger and fatigue they feel is so great that no one feeling the same would be able to resist eating and resting. According to my theory, following The Fresh Food Diet is the best way to solve the problem because it reduces the inflammation which then reduces the intensity of hunger to normal, resistible levels and returns energy levels to normal.
