<a name="memory"></a>
## A Trip Down Memory Lane

Many researchers study the diets and lifestyles of populations of people who lived in traditional ways that hadn't changed much for thousands, or in some cases tens of thousands, of years, and who had spectacularly good health compared to most of us nowadays. Hunter gathers are one example but there have been others such as Scottish crofters and Swiss alpine farmers. I think the information gathered from these studies is very useful in better understanding nutrition and the rise of modern diseases. One very clear similarity between all the various traditional populations is that they almost exclusively ate very fresh, local, in-season produce that they cooked themselves.

This approach to nutrition has many critics who argue that as most of these populations have long-since ceased to exist, we're not really sure exactly how they lived and even if we did know, the foods they ate are no longer available. 

But we don't have to go back so far. The really dramatic rise in the chronic diseases that afflict us today has happened in the last 40 or so years. I was born into a fairly affluent middle class family in the south east of England in 1966. I remember a time when almost nobody of any age was fat yet everyone ate 3 times a day until they were full. We all ate as much as we liked and rarely got fat.

So I'm going to set out my memory of what we ate in those days. I was pretty young so I apologise if I've misremembered some things.

One thing that people often don't notice is how much richer, in absolute terms, people have become over time. Poverty is generally measured in relative terms, for example a person is considered poor if their income is more than 40% below average. With this measure, poverty is in effect a result of inequality rather than necessarily a lack of purchasing power. But in absolute terms, people have become far richer. I think I saw a study that found that the purchasing power of a family in the top 20% of income when I was young would now be approximately in the bottom 20%. Most people nowadays can afford so much stuff that almost no one could afford when I was young. For example, despite being from a fairly affluent family, I had very few clothes as a child and what I had came from jumble sales. If I go on I'll sound like the Monty Python sketch where they talk about eating cold gravel for breakfast. Life was actually pretty good (it's even better now), we just couldn't afford to buy that much stuff; almost no one could. 

People rarely ate at restaurants or from takeaways. They couldn't afford to. You might get some fish and chips once every couple of weeks. There weren't many restaurants in those days - there just wasn't the call for them. A typical medium size town would have a 'Bernie Inn' where people might go for steak and chips as a treat to celebrate their birthday and maybe an Italian restaurant. There would be a few fish and chip shops and maybe a couple of Chinese takeaways. Nowadays the same town will have at least 20 restaurants and multiple fast food outlets.

Supermarkets were only just arriving. We had a lesson in primary school about what they are and the teacher pronounced 'supermarket' in an odd way. More typically, a family food shop would involve a visit to a greengrocer and a visit to a butcher. The food available was mostly local as the cost of importing exotic fruits and vegetables from overseas would have made them unaffordable.

The fruits and vegetables were also mostly in-season as the cost of storage and ethylene ripening would have made them unaffordable.

Tinned food had started to be available but wasn't often used, at least not in my family. Tin openers in those days were absolutely atrocious. The crank part was small and made of metal. It was hard to turn and cut into your fingers when you opened a can. It wasn't until at least well into the 1970s as far as I remember when some bright spark thought of making a tin opener that wasn't a nightmare to use.

Ready meals didn't exist as far as I remember. Few would have been able to afford them. People still knew how to cook and so could easily and cheaply cook something far nicer than a ready meal.

Meat and fish that was pre-packed in protective environments on supermarket shelves didn't exist as far as I remember. There were butchers and fishmongers who sold fresh produce. Even a small village would have a butcher. Now they've all closed down and it's hard enough to find a butcher even in a big city.

Frozen food existed but it wasn't really a thing until deep freezes became trendy in the late 1970s. Fridges in those days were tiny compared to nowadays and had an even tinier freezer compartment that was really just for making ice. You could maybe get a pack of frozen peas in there too at a push.

People ate 3 meals a day and there wasn't much snacking because there generally wasn't anything to snack on. You had to wait until the meal had been cooked. You might have a packet of crisps, some toast or some biscuits in between meals if you were particularly hungry. I would start getting pretty hungry an hour or so before lunch and supper and then I'd eat until I was full.

Sugar was eaten in moderation. Lunch and supper would typically end with a dessert of some sort. You might put some sugar on your cornflakes at breakfast and people often put sugar in their tea or coffee. Artificial sweeteners existed but were expensive and rarely used and I don't thing things like high fructose corn syrup were at all prevalent. 

Fizzy drinks (soda) existed but weren't often drunk because they were too expensive. People drank water, milk, tea, coffee, orange squash and alcohol, and that was about it.

Bread was very much a staple. Every house had a toaster. Factory-made ready-sliced bread existed and was widely eaten. Worries about gluten were unheard of. People spread butter on their bread. Margarine started to be used much later under the belief that butter was unhealthy and margarine was healthier. This belief is entirely wrong in my opinion, by the way. Butter is absolutely allowed, indeed encouraged, on The Fresh Food Diet and margarine is forbidden. As for bread, I'm not sure. I do sometimes react to bread but not always. I think bread may be made very differently nowadays to how it was made when I was young, so it may have been better back then than it is now. I do eat bread though and it's allowed on the diet. Brown bread was quite rare when I was young - people mostly ate white bread. I prefer brown bread myself and it is said to be healthier but I don't know. There are potential issues with anti-nutrients such as lectins. I don't think that this is an area that it very well understood. Sour-dough bread wasn't a thing in England although I think it might have been in other countries that also had good health. Sour-dough is likely to contain a lot of biogenic amines and so it is risky, but on the other hand it's been eaten for thousands of years so maybe our bodies recognise it and are able to neutralise the amines. I really don't know. Jam, marmalade, Marmite and peanut butter were popular spreads but these are quite risky I think from a biogenic amine point of view, particularly peanut butter. I love bread, butter and peanut butter but tend to only eat them occasionally on special occasions. 

Microwaves existed but almost no one had one. There was nothing to use them for and most people couldn't afford one anyway. Families cooked their meals from raw ingredients using their cookers and ate the meal straight afterwards. On a rare occasion that there was food left over until the next day, you heated it up in an oven or a saucepan. Microwaves were actually frowned upon back then. If you did eat out at a restaurant and they heated up your food in a microwave, it was considered that you'd been cheated.
