## Fruit juice

If you squeeze the fruit yourself, and the fruit from which you are squeezing complies with the rules then fruit juice is allowed. Small amounts of lemon juice that you have squeezed yourself or are store-bought (up to 20 grams a day) are also allowed although not particularly recommended. But in general the pre-squeezed juices such as you get in supermarkets are not allowed even if they appear freshly squeezed. Most of these are actually months old. I can't be bothered to go into how they are made here - you can look it up on Google - but it's really shocking. 

Juices with a shorter shelf life that separate out on the shelf (with the sediment sinking to the bottom and the top becoming clearer) and that are made from local fruit (such as apple juice in the UK made from UK apples) should in theory be OK, but I've tried them and fairly consistently reacted badly to them, so they are still not allowed. Maybe they use older apples or there's something else going on in the production that they don't tell us about. Possibly the artisan apple juice from farmer's markets might be OK, I don't know. I once got a severe adverse reaction to some orange juice that I bought from a stall in Camden Market where they have a machine that squeezes the juice on site. I was quite surprised, but probably the oranges contained high levels of histamine. Citrus fruits in general are almost always banned on low histamine diets.

So unfortunately, delicious though they are, store-bought juices aren't allowed. There aren't many drinks that are allowed. Water, white or green tea and herbal teas are about it.