---
title: "Calcium"
date: 2019-03-13T17:13:39Z
draft: false
---

The recommended daily intake for calcium for different countries varies mostly from [400 mg per day to 800 mg per day](http://apjcn.nhri.org.tw/server/apjcn/2/4/183.htm). The World Health Organisation recommends [400-500 mg per day](https://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/trs916/en/gsfao_osteo.pdf?ua=1). In the UK it is 700 mg per day. As usual, the US has a far higher RDI than everyone else at [1000 mg per day](https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/calcium-supplements/art-20047097). One of the reasons that there is a variation, beyond the power of supplements lobbyists, is the source of the calcium. It is far better absorbed from green leafy vegetables than it is from dairy. Japan, where people eat more green leafy vegetables and less dairy than the US, has one of the lower RDIs.

As far as I can remember, countries have increased their RDIs for calcium quite a bit over the last few decades. The US is even thinking of raising their RDI again to [1300 mg per day](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reference_Daily_Intake). I think that Japan's used to be 500 mg and they have upped it to 600 mg. This seems very strange to me given that humans can't have changed that much genetically in a few decades. My guess is that the main reason they keep increasing it is due to the widespread incidence of osteoporosis which has become a lot worse over the past few decades. There is some evidence that increased calcium intake increases bone density, but it's not at all clear. Genetic factors may account for [70-80% of bone mass](http://apjcn.nhri.org.tw/server/apjcn/2/4/183.htm) and there isn't convincing data showing that populations with lower intakes of calcium have more osteoporosis that those with higher intakes.

According to the main theory underlying this diet, the biogenic amines that pass from food into the bloodstream can lead to osteoporosis, amongst other things, depending on which cells the biogenic amines become attached to. If they attach to osteoclasts then they will lead, over time, to osteoporosis. The increased amounts of biogenic amines being eaten in foods over the last few decades as people have eaten less fresh food are the most likely explanation for the increased incidence of osteoporosis in my opinion. This, I suspect, has led to increases in RDIs for calcium in a rather fruitless attempt to stem the increases in osteoporosis and in the absence of any better ideas.

Attempts to meet the ever-increasing calcium RDIs have likely led to increases in consumption of supplements and increases in consumption of cheese and yogurt. But according to the site [American Bone Health](https://americanbonehealth.org/nutrition/how-much-calcium-and-vitamin-d-do-you-need/) there is evidence that taking calcium supplements can be counterproductive. And cheese and yogurt generally contain a lot of biogenic amines which, according to the theory underlying this diet, will also be counterproductive to bone health. 

Getting 1000 mg of calcium a day, let alone 1300 mg, is actually quite challenging if you don't eat vast quantities of dairy. Many people don't tolerate dairy foods well and, in the case of cheese and yogurt, they generally contain a lot of biogenic amines. Green leafy vegetables are a great source of calcium but few people have the inclination or the money to eat the enormous quantity of green leafy vegetables necessary to get such a large amount of calcium.

As someone who suffered for decades with undiagnosed histamine intolerance, I do have osteoporosis unfortunately. But this isn't through a lack of eating calcium - I love cheese and yogurt and ate them extensively before I discovered that they were likely to be harming me. Now that I have osteoporosis, there's not much I can do about it other than eat a low histamine diet as at my age the body doesn't really put bone mass back on again once it's been lost. But since eating a low histamine diet, my bone density has become stable, despite eating less calcium than before.

I personally aim to eat at least 600 mg per day of calcium, the Japanese RDI, on the basis that, like the Japanese, I get my calcium mainly from green leafy vegetables rather than dairy, and also, like the Japanese, I'm slightly shorter than an average Westerner. In practice I tend to eat quite a bit more than this. But if I were to only get 500 mg a day I don't think I would be too stressed as I don't think that the evidence for more calcium being necessary is very strong.